Documentation getting started (#8)
eclipse-sprotty/sprotty-website: hugo/content/docs/getting_started.md

---
title: 'Getting Started'
weight: 200
---
Our 'Getting Started' example consists of a simple application that displays a list of tasks, their status, and the relationship between them in a HTML page.

The main steps to integrate Sprotty into our application are as follows:
1. [Set-up](#setting-up-our-application) your application.
2. [Define your model](#define-your-model) by creating subclasses of `SModelElement`.
3. [Implement views](#implement-views) to generate SVGs for each type of model element.
4. [Configure the diagram](#configure-the-diagram) through dependency injection.
5. [Connect to a model source](#connect-to-a-model-source), either local or remote

> ## Setting-up our application

Reviewer: Unsure whether we should capitalize all proper nouns in the headers. I recommended this in Jonah's PRs, but now I'm not so sure. Either way, it would be good to make sure our headers are fairly uniform in style across doc pages.

> Our example application is based on TypeScript. In the following we will set up our project to be ready for receiving Sprotty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our example application is based on TypeScript. In this application we will set up our project to be ready for receiving Sprotty.
```

import { IView, RenderingContext, SNode } from 'sprotty';
import { TaskNode } from './models';

@injectable()
export class TaskNodeView implements IView {
    render(node: Readonly<SNode & TaskNode>, context: RenderingContext): VNode {
        const position = 50;
        return <g>
            <rect class-sprotty-node={true} class-task={true}
                class-running={node.isRunning}
                class-finished={node.isFinished}
                width={node.size.width}
                height={node.size.height}
            >
            </rect>
            <text x={position} y={position + 5}>{node.name}</text>
        </g>;
    }
}
```

The SVG elements are styled with CSS using classes that are injected using the `class-myClass={boolean expression}` in the jsx expression. Add the following to `styles.css`:
```css
.sprotty-node.task {
    fill: #c0e0fc;
    stroke: #444;
    stroke-width: 1;
}

.sprotty-node.task.running {
    fill: #f00;
}

.sprotty-node.task.finished {
    fill: #0f0;
}

text {
    stroke-width: 0;
    stroke: #000;
    fill: #000;
    font-family: sans-serif;
    font-size: 10pt;
    text-anchor: middle;
}
```
## Configure the diagram

> The configuration of our Sprotty application is done via Dependency Injection using [InversifyJS](https://inversify.io/). We recommend defining your InversifyJS container in a file named `di.config.ts` which could look like this:

Reviewer: Might be nice to add where this file should go in your project.

```typescript
import { Container, ContainerModule } from 'inversify';
import { configureModelElement, configureViewerOptions, loadDefaultModules, LocalModelSource, PolylineEdgeView, SEdge, SGraph, SGraphView, SNode, TYPES } from 'sprotty';
import { TaskNodeView } from './views';

export const createContainer = (containerId: string) => {
    const myModule = new ContainerModule((bind, unbind, isBound, rebind) => {
        bind(TYPES.ModelSource).to(LocalModelSource).inSingletonScope();

        const context = { bind, unbind, isBound, rebind };
        configureModelElement(context, 'graph', SGraph, SGraphView);
        configureModelElement(context, 'task', SNode, TaskNodeView);
        configureModelElement(context, 'edge', SEdge, PolylineEdgeView);

        configureViewerOptions(context, {
            needsClientLayout: false,
            baseDiv: containerId
        });
    });

    const container = new Container();
    loadDefaultModules(container);
    container.load(myModule);
    return container;
};
```

> Views are registerd using `configureModelElement` which takes a `context`, a type, an element class, and a view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Views are registered using `configureModelElement` which takes a `context`, a type, an element class, and a view.
```

`loadDefaultModules` is used to include Sprotty's default modules, while `container.load` can be used to include extra modules required by our application.

## Connect to a model source
Sprotty supports two kinds of model sources:

> * LocalModelSource allows to create models directly in TypeScript or JavaScript.
> * WebSocketDiagramServer delegates to a remote source that is connected via web socket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `LocalModelSource` allows to create models directly in TypeScript or JavaScript
* `WebSocketDiagramServer` delegates to a remote source that is connected via a web socket
```

In this example, we consider the local variant. To enable the model source, we add the following line to our module definition (see previous section):
```ts
bind(TYPES.ModelSource).to(LocalModelSource).inSingletonScope()
```

> Afterwards you can use the LocalModelSource to initialize and update the model. For example, the following `graph` consists of three task nodes with a connection between the first two. Create a new file `model-source.ts` at the root of the project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Afterwards you can use the `LocalModelSource` to initialize and update the model. For example, the following `graph` consists of three task nodes with a connection between the first two. Create a new file `model-source.ts` at the root of the project:
```

```typescript
import { SGraph, SEdge, SNode } from "sprotty-protocol";
import { TaskNode } from "./models";

export const graph: SGraph = {
    type: 'graph',
    id: 'graph',
    children: [
        <SNode & TaskNode>{
            type: 'task',
            id: 'task01',
            name: 'First Task',
            isFinished: true,
            isRunning: false,
            position: { x: 0, y: 0 },
            size: { width: 100, height: 100 }
        },
        <SNode & TaskNode>{
            type: 'task',
            id: 'task02',
            name: 'Second Task',
            isFinished: false,
            isRunning: true,
            position: { x: 0, y: 200 },
            size: { width: 100, height: 100 }
        },
        <SNode & TaskNode>{
            type: 'task',
            id: 'task03',
            name: 'Third Task',
            isFinished: false,
            isRunning: false,
            position: { x: 150, y: 0 },
            size: { width: 100, height: 100 }
        },
        <SEdge>{
            type: 'edge',
            id: 'edge01',
            sourceId: 'task01',
            targetId: 'task02',
            routerKind: 'manhattan',
        }
    ]
};
```

> Finally, we need to create the entry point of our application in a `index.ts` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to create the entry point of our application in an `index.ts` file:
```

```typescript
import "reflect-metadata";
import { LocalModelSource, TYPES } from 'sprotty';
import { createContainer } from './di.config';
import { graph } from './model-source';

export default function run() {
    const container = createContainer("sprotty-container");
    const modelSource = container.get<LocalModelSource>(TYPES.ModelSource);
    modelSource.setModel(graph);
}

document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => run());
```

That's it! Run `npm run build` and open your HTML file, you should see the following diagram! There is some level of interactivity by default, try it out! Select nodes by clicking on them and move them around by dragging, adjust the zoom-level with the mouse wheel, navigate the diagram by panning via left-click and drag outside of a node.

> ![Getting started diagram](/getting-started-diagram.png)

Reviewer: Recommended next steps?

Author: I think I will add this later on when we have decided on the order of the documentation.
